Data Layer
~~~~~~~~~~

Data Model
^^^^^^^^^^

The backend data model (written in Python) lives in ``src/<module>/models``.

The data model classes and fields are mapped to database tables and
columns using SQLAlchemy. These mappings are defined in the model
classes themselves. Constraints used for validation and data integrity
are described within the model classes as well.

Internal vs. External Model
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

An abstraction exists between the actual data model and the external
representation of the data model rendered through the REST interface.
This abstraction is necessary because it decouples the external
structure of a model from the actual internal structure of the model.
This decoupling allows changes to be made to the internal model without
violating the contract provided by the REST API. Without this
abstraction changes made to the internal model could cause consumers of
the REST API to break, and that would be bad.

The "decoupling" is two places:

1. First, the resource-representation is constructed using the Builder
   class (``ggrc.builder.json``), the behavior of which is currently
   defined from the model and the ``_api_attrs`` attributes.
2. Second, the interaction of resources and the database is defined by
   the Resource class (``ggrc.services.common.Resource``). The
   ``service(...)`` mappings in ``ggrc.services.__init__`` are defining
   API endpoints and linking them to Builder classes (autogenerated from
   the supplied model).

Attributes to be included in the external representation of the model
are declared via the ``_api_attrs`` attribute of a Python model.
Attributes not included in that list will not be included in external
representations of the model.

Database Migrations
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Migrations are implemented and executed via
`alembic <http://alembic.zzzcomputing.com/en/latest/>`_, augmented to
support extension modules in ggrc.migrate.  (The standard ``alembic``
command will *not* do the right thing.)

Migration scripts are written in Python and live in
``src/<module>/migrations/versions``.

Migrations are executed by running ``db_migrate`` from the command line.
 This effectively runs

::

    python -c "import ggrc.migrate; ggrc.migrate.upgradeall()"

which iterates through existing modules and runs missing migrations for
each.

Migrations can be autogenerated from a fully-migrated environment by
first making changes to in-Python model definitions, and then executing
(e.g.)

::

    python -m ggrc.migrate ggrc_workflows revision --autogenerate -m "Add Cycle.is_current"

This will create a new migration file with many unwanted changes
(indexes, changes to nullability, etc) due to inconsistencies between
database state and model definition.  These should eventually be fixed.
 (Indexes should eventually be consistently named, etc.)
